this calories in calories out model
doesn't work at all if you're trying to
lose weight what you need to do is Dr
Jason H the founder of intermittent
fasting whose influential work could be
the key to a healthier and even longer
life every continent is seeing this
increase in obesity but we put the blame
on the individual the problem is there's
something wrong with the message we're
giving people and I can go over a few
examples first of all exercise is really
good in a number of ways but in terms of
weight loss it's actually a very very
small effect the whole idea that you
need to eat as soon as you get up is
just false we know from twin studies
that 70% of your risk of becoming obese
is due to genetics but it doesn't
explain why the population became much
more obese and we know that you can't
cure obesity by saying eat fewer
calories it's about fixing the hormones
that are behind the calories if you want
to lose body fat you actually need to
extend the period of time that you're
not eating eating so you do some
intermittent fasting there's all this
data showing that fasting activates the
body it increases your energy your
concentration a Treatment available to
everybody for free and it will be
healthier for us so I need some advice
then what does your fast look like what
food should I be giving my body and in
what proportions the first thing you got
to do is I've got to talk to you about
these new injections people are getting
to lose weight I
think
quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to just subscribe helps us scale
the guest helps us scale the production
and it makes this show bigger so if I
could ask you for one favor if you've
watched the show before and you've
enjoyed it and you like this episode
that you're currently watching could you
please hit the Subscribe button thank
you so much and I will repay that
gesture by making sure that everything
we do here gets better and better and
better and better that is a promise I'm
willing to make you do we have a
[Music]
deal Dr
Jason Hey Stephen how are you I'm really
really good this book here the Obesity
code unlocking the secrets of weight
loss why did you write this book what
was the sort of driving motivation
behind committing what must have been a
very long part of your life to this
subject
matter uh it's it was actually a very
interesting sort of Journey of Discovery
for me so I did my training in
Nephrology which is kidney disease so
I'm a kidney disease specialist and I
thought about weight loss sort of very
conventionally sort of calories in
calories out just watch what you eat
sort of thing and that's what's taught
to all doctors is that it's
extremely unhelpful for people it
doesn't work at all it doesn't work for
patients and it doesn't work for for for
doctors even right so doctors who want
to lose
weight they don't they don't use
calories and calories out because it
doesn't really work and we all know this
um every person has sort of counted
their calories and almost all of them
failed to succeed so the whole point was
how to get people to lose weight and so
I started to look into the literature
and I started to read about it and so on
I got very very interested in it and
again I I started to become very unhappy
with the discussion about calories and
calories out because the whole point was
that people had this idea that it was
energy balance right and there's this
sort of energy balance equation which is
uh calories in minus calories out equals
body fat right because body fat is a way
to store calories but that's not a very
helpful sort of description of how to
approach the problem right the problem
is not that people didn't realize that
they had to eat fewer calories or
increase their calorie expenditure the
problem was why were they eating more
calories than they could expend right
and it's because the body is is being
told to store energy right that's the
way it is that's why you're taking in
more calories or you're storing more
calories because your body body has
hormones that tell you to store calories
so there's a hormone called insulin for
example and if you give people insulin
so inject them with insulin which is a
drug for type two
diabetes almost everybody gains weight
so if you give somebody insulin they
gain weight if I gave you insulin you
would gain weight it has nothing to do
with the you know your willpower for
example if I gave you insulin you would
gain weight why because I'm giving your
body the instructions to store energy so
you're saying that weight gain and
obesity in particular isn't a function
of calories in calories out it is a
function of hormones it's a function of
hormones and it's sort of you have to
think about it in sort of levels right
so calories in calories out is true so
body fat is a storage is it's a way to
store energy which is calories equals
calories in calories out but that's not
the real question the question is why
are you storing more calories then
you're expending and it's because you're
telling your body to do so so for
example if if you take another equal
I'll give you an analogy say alcoholism
is alcohol in minus alcohol out right
same same idea or if you have a room
it's the number of people how how full
it is is how many people enter the room
or exit the room right so same same idea
right it's absolutely true so alcohol in
minus alcohol out equals how drunk you
equals how drunk you are so alcoholism
so can you simply cure alcoholism by
telling an alcoholic oh just drink less
alcohol than you expend it's like yes
you can say that and it's absolutely
true but it's not useful in any way
because you've never gotten to the
really the deeper understanding of why
that person is taking in more alcohol
right you have to get to that next level
and say what you know it's like going
one level deeper why why are they
drinking more alcohol maybe they're
depressed maybe they're addicted deal
with the addiction that is the way to
deal with alcoholism you can't cure it
just by saying drink less alcohol the
same way you can't cure the obesities by
saying eat fewer calories because you're
not understanding why the body is is
storing more energy with the amount of
information we now have the amount of
science we have one would expect that
obesity levels would be coming
down yeah unfortunately if you think
about the way most people think about it
it's mostly still in calories even in
the academic centers they all think
about sort of calories how to get
calories down how to reduce calories and
I always and I always say well it's not
about the calories right it's about
fixing the hormones that are behind the
calories like because you can choose to
eat fewer calories yes that's true but
you can't but you have to ask yourself
why are people
eating um so many calories right well
it's because they're hungry you can't
choose to be less hungry and therefore
you have to really talk about
controlling the hunger and controlling
the hormones which are behind the
calories that you eat and that's going
to be much more successful to you if you
take two different foods equal number of
calories and you eat them the hormonal
response to those calories are
completely different so you eat two
slices of white bread and jam all that
energy that so insulin spikes up because
it's very high and refined carbohydrates
all that energy goes straight into your
body fat and you've left none of it for
for for energy for your day by 10:30 now
you're ravenous and you go get yourself
a lowfat muffin again pure carbs insulin
spikes up all of that goes straight into
your your fat stores why because you
told it to remember that when you eat
white bread or muffins or refined
carbohydrates you're going to have this
insulin Spike which is going to tell
your body to store energy if you eat an
egg you don't get that Spike and Insulin
so that that energy that you've taken
those calories are there you can use it
and so what happens well that keeps you
full during the day if you're telling
your body to immediately store those
calories as body fat well guess what
over time you're going to gain body fat
because you told your body to do that if
you eat the egg and insulin's not
spiking up well you haven't told your
body to store that energy so it's going
to be around for you to use all day long
and you won't be hungry and you're not
going to be hungry because your body's
like why do I need to eat again because
you know you you basically have taken
the energy that you need I've got it
available right it's sort of like if you
go to the the the grocery store right
you can store food in the refrigerator
suppose you go to the grocery store put
all your food away lock it away in the
in the refrigerator now you have nothing
to eat right you're going to say oh I
need to go out and get some more food
right same thing with your body right so
if you take food
but you've also spiked up your insulin
you're going to lock away all those that
energy immediately into into your fat
stores it's not going to be available
for you to use well you're going to say
I'm going to go out and get more so you
haven't controlled the hunger that's
going to lead to the caloric intake
which is going to lead to the weight
gain people look at this through an
evolutionary lens and say you know we
just didn't have this much food so it's
the abundance and um ease of access to
food it's the fridges that we now have
if it's the you know we never had
fridges in our home so people point at
it and go well that's why people are
getting gaining weight and you know
we're suffering with obesity at epidemic
levels it's just because there's more
Supply and the brain is taking advantage
of it because once upon a time if we
didn't eat that jam and toast then we
would have you know maybe not have been
able to find food for another two weeks
or something yeah I don't think that's
the whole story because if you think
about it uh and people again uh um make
that assumption that we don't have any
control over uh our body fatness right
so they say well it's availables you're
going to take it right in fact that's
not true because we actually have a
number of different uh hormones that
tell us to stop eating okay so if you
eat you cannot simply keep eating and
eating and eating right if you go to an
all you can eat buffet at some point you
have to stop because you're full right
so there are systems very powerful
systems within our body that tell us to
stop eating so you eat food there are uh
stomach stretch receptors for example so
as your stomach stretches out it sends a
signal to your brain and says stop
eating if you eat a lot of protein uh it
activates a hormone called peptide YY
which tells you to stop eating if you
eat a lot of dietary fat you activate a
hormone called chosy ainin which again
tells you to stop eating these are very
powerful if you look in the wild there
are no obese Antelope there are no obese
Lions why because how much body fat your
you carry is actually very important if
you are obese as an antelope you're
going to get eaten if you are an obes
lion you're not going to catch any food
so therefore it's going to correct
itself so if I overeat now my body will
basically overcompensate by burning off
the extra calories to it absolutely so
if you eat a huge meal right you eat you
know you go to a big wedding or
something like that you eat a huge meal
the next day you're probably not that
hungry if you eat a giant steak so
you're activating all these satiety
hormones peptide y y chosy ainin you're
eating all this food well you may not be
hungry for the next day so that means
that my body has some kind of Baseline
weight yeah it will know whether you
should eat more or less so there's a
this concept called the sort of of body
set weight which is a sort of
thermometer that is your body sets a
weight that you should be at and if you
go above that weight or if you eat too
much it will activate hormonal systems
to bring it back down if you don't eat
enough it will also activate hormonal
systems to bring it up so it's like a
thermostat that you set you have in your
room for example you set the the room
temperature if it's too hot you're the
the room activates the air conditioning
if it's too cold it activates the heat
your body actually acts the same way if
you gain too much body fat your fat
cells for example will produce leptin
which is another hormone the leptin
tells your body to stop eating that's
really interesting so in the case of OB
Beast people their set point must just
be really high yes and that's the Crux
of the matter why is that set point
being overridden just like if you have a
room that's too hot and you look and you
say the thermometer is set for room
temperature why is it so hot in here
then you can say okay well what's the
problem and the problem is not you know
heat in versus Heat out right that's
that's a very simplistic way same thing
if your body has too much body fat you
got to then think about why are you
overcoming the normal compensatory
mechanisms that are happening that are
stopping you from eating a lot of it
relates to processing of foods of course
so if you take out so remember I talked
about stretch re receptors in the
stomach right so you eat natural natural
foods there's a natural break it
stretches the stomach you stop eating
well what's one way pull out all the
fiber process the foods turn it into say
a very fine dust that means it's
absorbed extremely quickly into the
blood stream so that means that pure
you've got Pure carbohydrate basically
mainlining it into your I like like an
IV your glucose spikes way up your
insulin spikes way up completely
unnatural right if you eat pure
carbohydrate instead of eating it with
you know proteins and fats it's going to
go it's going to shoot way high that's
unnatural and that's going to overcome
the
natural tendencies for you to stop
eating so you know you you've basically
overcome that that that that protective
mechanism because you've ultr processed
the the carbohydrates if you don't eat
any protein if you don't eat any fat
you're not activating peptide WI Y which
is the satiety hormone you're not
activated chinin all of a sudden you're
eating you know 500 calories of white
bread but you have zero satiety or if
you drink a Coca-Cola or a soda for
example I've always you know thought
about this it's like how can you take a
th000 calories for example in one of
those giant sodas you get at the ball
game or something and don't feel full at
all whereas if you took a steak that's
1,000 calories you'd be like I'm pretty
full I don't really feel like eating you
drink the soda you're like I really feel
like eating some chips or popcorn or
something why because it has zero
satiety interesting so if I'm if I've
got a baseball stadium what I want to do
is I want to make sure people get a soda
because then they'll also buy the chips
but if they just eat the chips you know
maybe they won't buy anything else but
the soda is going to um increase my
Revenue because it'll basically just
pass right through them it'll pass right
through them they're going to store all
that energy as calories but they're
going to want more because you haven't
made them full right so the the whole
point is that you have to think more
than about the calories there's more
there than just the calorie story
there's this whole hormonal balance
you're saying that overeating isn't just
a choice it's a hormon driven Behavior
it's a hormon driven Behavior I mean the
whole thing about obesity is is quite
interesting to me because if you think
about obesity if you think about uh in
the United States which is where I get a
lot of my data from um you know you have
maybe 70% of people overweight or obese
and it's going up every year it's been
going up every year since
1977 and if you think about that it
tells you that the problem is not
willpower the problem is not the people
the problem is the environment that they
find themselves in the food environment
that they find themselves in because you
can take an analogy say you have a
hundred children one of them fails well
that might be the child they didn't
study what if 70 of them fail would you
say it's it's each and every one of
them's fault or would you say it's more
likely that it's the teacher's fault I
think it's more likely that it's the
teacher's fault so if we have a 100
Americans and 70 of them are obese the
problem is likely not an individual
willpower problem the problem is likely
that there's something wrong with the
message we're giving people the
information we're giving people and the
food environment that we're finding our
eles in which is dominated by this sort
of calories in calories out thinking and
what's really unfair of course is that
we put the
blame on the Obesity or overweight on
the individual and we say well they let
themselves go and they didn't watch
themselves they weren't careful it's
their fault and that's the stigma that
comes with this whole calories in
calories out thinking because we say
it's their fault because they could
choose what they eat it's like yes they
could choose what they eat but they
didn't choose the food environment that
is telling them to eat all this ultr
processed food that is making all this
Ultra processed food available to them
that is telling them that all this Ultra
processed food is good for you so leptin
is this hormone that essentially brings
down my Hunger makes me less hungry is
it therefore possible that people are
becoming lepin resistant there is leapin
resistance the question again is why and
the way to think about it is it's sort
of this sort of balance right so insulin
if you give people insulin like if you
think about causes of obesity what
causes people to gain weight well if I
give you insulin you'll gain weight if I
give me insulin I'll gain weight so
insulin causes weight gain whereas
leptin will cause the opposite so it's
sort of the Seesaw body fat is nothing
more or less than uh a store of energy
right and you only store energy when
your body tells you our entire body runs
on hormones right nothing happens
without the hormonal system being
activated so insulin is pushing us to
gain weight lefting us is pushing us to
lose weight and what's happening is that
one is sort of overcoming the other
insulin is overcoming the leptin if
obesity isn't about a lack of will power
and it isn't just a case of people being
lazy or all those things that sometimes
some people stereotypically
assert I've also heard the
counterargument that obesity is a
function of our genetic makeup and our
we inherit obesity from our parents you
know is there any truth in Merit in that
um it's it's yes yes and no so yes there
is a very strong sort of genetic
predisposition to obesity so if you take
you know somebody with a family history
then look at the genetics about 70% of
your risk of becoming obese is due to
genetics and we know that from twin
studies for example what do we know from
twin studies if you take twins um and
raise them sort of in different
environments you know they actually turn
out very similarly so we know that
there's a there's a genetic component to
obesity so when they they sort of do the
uh calculations they say about 70% of
obesity is sort of genetically related
so if you take a a twin that comes from
originally a family that were obese and
you put them with a family that are not
obese yeah the child will still likely
become obese even with the family that
are not obese yeah so this was done in
obviously they they had uh twins that
were sort of separated at Birth compare
them after they've grown up and say
what's the sort of correlation between
the weight of the two and it's about 70%
so you have somebody who's very
overweight and you know twin a goes into
one family twin B goes into a second
family you know twin B uh is going to be
more prone to gaining weight even if
they're with a thin family right so the
environment has some role but it's it
it's the genetics have a very large role
too 17% of 70% is is is genetic so there
is however the part that's important is
that that doesn't explain why we have
obesity in the last 40 to 50 years
because the genetics of the world
population has not changed so if we're
seeing more obesity now and remember
this is not a a USA problem it's a it's
a worldwide problem we see it in Asia we
see it in Europe we see it in America we
see it in South America we see it
everywhere uh we see it in Africa so
every continent is seeing this increase
in obesity therefore it's not due this
this recent change within the last 50
years is not due to a change in genetics
so while yes it's true that there is a
strong genetic component that explains
my risk of say obesity compared to yours
but doesn't explain how the population
of the United States for example all of
a sudden became much more obese in
general so you're saying this is really
about a predisposition which basically
means your genetics make you more or
less likely for some reason um which is
a genetic reason to become obese
when you make certain lifestyle choices
um but that is a predisposition which
means that and I guess your work asserts
that the predisposition relates to your
hormones response to the foods that we
eat so really it's really a a gen genc
response to foods which is based on your
hormone response we all have a certain
genetic sort of predisposition to
obesity right so all of us have a
certain risk some people obviously they
eat whatever they want and they don't
gain weight we all know people like that
right and some people sort of look at a
muffin and they gain weight so you have
that genetic predisposition so that
explains the difference between two
people but it doesn't explain the
difference within an entire population
like if you take the entire population
of the Earth or even of America or
whatever the genetics haven't changed
sufficiently of that entire population
to say why there's more obesity now than
before so we're inheriting our parents
hormone
response uh yeah but we're we're we're
the the hormone response that we have is
going to be dependent a lot on genetics
but the food choices we're making are
different than our our parents so
they're eating different things if you
think back about what your grandmother
ate and stuff it's different than the
food environment that we find ourselves
in right now and that food environment
is creating this sort of uh is sort of
increasing the risk uh over over time
that's the sort of uh what what we need
to try and figure out and why we need to
have a deeper discussion as opposed to
calories because we've been having this
sort of calories discussion for you know
30 40 years it just hasn't been very
helpful you call it a a deception you
say in chap part two of your book you
say the calorie deception yeah and you
say there are five wrong assumptions
about obesity and weight loss the
calorie Cal calorie in calorie out are
independent of each other so won't
trigger one another and this interesting
point about the basil metabolic rate
being stable yeah is that in essence
because people you know people will
often say I have a low metabolism it's
kind of like a word in culture if
someone is um obese often the the
diagnosis is they have a low metabolism
yeah is there any Merit in that is that
true oh absolutely the question so when
you think about so body fat you think
about the energy balance equation body
fat equals calories in minus calories
out this often leads people to say well
just eat 500 few calories and you'll
lose a pound of fat per week it's it's
unquestionably false because every
single study that we've done over the
last 50 years shows that if you eat 500
fewer calories then over time depending
on what foods you're eating if
eventually your body will just burn 500
fewer calories so that's your basil
metabolic rate the number of calories
that your body is expending in one day
so we see this in almost every single
study we've known about it for like 80
years at least you eat fewer calories
your body Burns fewer calories well
that's going to limit how much weight
you're going to lose right so this idea
that just eat fewer calories will
automatically lead to weight loss is
completely false because we know that
eating fewer calories leads also to
burning fewer calories so you eat 500
less your body Burns 500 less and you're
not losing any body weight so I go on a
diet let's say because I'm trying to
lose weight my metabolism lowers to meet
the calorific Restriction that I've
imposed on myself yeah what then happens
when I come off the diet does my
metabolism stay generally yes low yeah
so that's that yo-yo dieting effect so
say you start with 2,000 calories in
2,000 calories out you're not gaining
weight you're not losing weight right
now you decide okay I'm going to go on a
diet so you go down to, 1500 calories
thinking that you're going to burn 2,000
and the body Fat's going to provide 500
right that's how you balance that
equation however if you eat the wrong
foods and you're eating all the time so
you're eating 10 times a day eight times
a day like people say you should you're
eating low fats or you're eating tons of
carbs you're spiking your insulin
insulin prevents you from burning body
fat Okay so we've again we've known
about this for 80 years so now you eat,
1500 calories but you're keeping your
insulin levels really high so few
calories but lots of high carb foods
eating all the time insulin stays high
you're you're taking in 1500 your body
is now burning 2,000 but you can't burn
any body fat so the calories that are
stored in your body fat cannot be cannot
be sort of taken out it's like it's in
the bank and the bank is closed it's you
can't take it out so what's going to
happen well you don't have a balanced
equation so that cannot cannot happen so
what happens is that in order to balance
that equation because your insulin
levels are high you're eating 1500
calories coming in your body can only
burn 1500 calories your metabolic rate
has just now gone down by 500 calories
and guess what you're not losing any
body fat so that's an example of how the
whole the calories idea is completely
wrong because if you continue to do that
what's going to happen over time is that
you you get tired because you're burning
fewer calories you don't have enough
energy to generate body heat so you're
cold you're tired you're hungry so you
say okay I'm going to go to 1,800
calories so now you're eating 1,00
calories but you're only burning 1500
calories guess what you gain weight and
you say but how can I gain weight I'm
eating less than I did yes you you are
eating less than the 2,000 calories you
used to eat you're eating 1,800 but
you're eating the wrong Foods very high
insulin Foods so therefore you're going
to gain weight in fact everybody says
that and and all the all the
nutritionists all the doctors just they
just don't believe them they say you're
lying you're cheating you're eating more
than you think so this explains
something that happened with one of my
friends which I always puzzled me he
swears by the calories in calorie out
thing I've spoken about him a few times
he posts about it online as well
um and he he actually managed to get a
pretty much like six-pack abs pretty
much and at the time it appears that he
was eating a lot of Domino's Pizzas a
lot of pizzas and I was thinking how's
this guy eating all these pizzas but
he's using his calories in calorie out
thing uh and then when the pizza stopped
yeah there was this yo-yo effect yeah
where he managed to get to basically
what I describe as a six-pack or there
thereabouts and then um stopped eating
all uh stopped the diet per se and then
there was this big yo-yo effect which I
imagine is what you said there what he's
done is he's lowered his metabolism then
when he goes up just a little bit it all
comes back it all comes back and then
some and then some yeah absolutely so
this form of
dieting is actually over the long term
probably going to make you gain weight
oh it's it's very detrimental and that's
what yo-yo dieting we all know it's very
detrimental but think about it
differently right so let's take a
different example with the same calories
which is why I keep saying you have to
think about more than the calories you
have to think about what the hormones
are because that's the instructions to
your body food contains calories energy
but it contains instructions as to what
to do so let's take an example you're
eating 2,000 calories in 2,000 calories
out now you go on a diet you want to you
take in, 1500 but what you do is you do
some intermittent fasting when you fast
insulin is going to fall that's the
whole point insulin is a hormone that
goes up when you eat it goes down when
you don't eat right so when you eat eat
insulin goes up your body wants to store
energy when you don't eat insulin goes
down your body says I have no energy I
have no food coming in please take it
out of storage so now you take 1500
calories but you do intermittent fasting
so you're allowing your insulin levels
to fall now 1500 calories are coming in
insulin levels are low your body wants
to burn 2,000 calories it says well
insulin levels are low let me take 500
calories from my body fat guess what you
have 500 coming from your body fat you
have 1,500 coming from your foods you
burn
2,000 it's a balanced equation so
instead of the opposite situation so and
and you see that the calories are the
same you went from 2,000 in to 1500 in
but what the difference was that you
allowed insulin to fall which allowed
you to burn body fat right it's the
hormonal signal that says please take
energy out open up the doors so that
body fat can come out and this is the
piece that's missing because people are
all all like well I'm this I'm that and
it's like well why can't you burn the
fat that's on your body cuz there's 200
300,000 calories of body fat why can't
you access it it's because you haven't
activated the right hormones so that you
can access it so now if you do
intermittent fasting you eat, 1500
calories you take 500 calories out your
body is burning 2,000 now all of a
sudden if you go off your diet and you
go back to 2,000 calories guess what you
don't gain weight you don't lose weight
same as before whereas before you go
even to 1,800 calories you lost weight
but the difference was not the calories
it was always 2,000 to 500 the
difference was you paid attention to the
hormones that you're telling your body
and the insulin is sort of the primary
hormone there's actually a lot more
there's you know there's there's there's
cortisol is is a very important hormone
there's other hormones you mentioned
burning calories there one of the
thoughts around the calories in Cal
calories out model is that you can just
exercise and if you burn a th000
calories exercising then that gives you
a little bit of a reserve there to eat
more for example yeah and it's probably
a very very small effect for for a
couple of reasons so we know that uh if
you
exercise and and I say this exercise is
really good for you in a number of ways
flexibility strength core all kinds of
things so very very important but in
terms of weight loss it's actually a
very very small effect why because one
the amount of calories you burn during
exercise are simply not that high so if
you look at you know if you do walking I
mean if you did eight hours of
high-intensity exercise yeah you're
going to burn a lot of calories but most
people I deal with which are sort of
middle-aged and higher you're talking
about sort of a quick walk or you know
45 half an hour three times a week sort
of thing and if you ever go on the
treadmill and you ever ever watch that
calorie counter on the treadmill you
know it goes up very very slowly right
you'll do half an hour and it'll be up
to like 120 calories or something like
that right so that exercise really
didn't burn off very many calories it's
the amount that you'd get in a couple of
cookies for example right so it's it's
just numerically it's just very small so
if you're you're taking in if your body
is normally using 2,000 calories with
your brain generating body heat your
heart your lungs your liver they're
using 2,000 calories and now you go up
to 2100 calories well percentage wise
it's not a huge deal right the other
problem with exercise is that it tends
to actually cause you to eat more so uh
again we've had Decades of study for
this if you exercise during the exercise
you have uh loss reduced appetite so you
have ex it's called exercise induced
anorexia so in the middle of a
basketball game you don't suddenly go oh
wow I'm really hungry right because your
your blood is flowing in your you know
in your muscles and so on uh you're not
thinking about The Hunger So Hunger
actually goes down during exercise but
after exercise we see this rebound so we
see that people are actually more hungry
after exercise and if you're hungrier
after exercise it's going to cause you
to tend to gain more weight in fact
there's this very interesting study that
was done a few years ago in Harvard
where they measured the sort of calorie
difference that you get with uh for for
children um in certain activities so
they said okay what if a child is
watching TV what's the average uh
caloric difference and it was like plus
100 calories per hour so for every hour
of TV they're sort of positive 100
calories over time right and that makes
sense you're just sitting there when you
look at mild exercise it's about the
same it's about positive 100 calories so
the only way that happens is that if
that that exercise is causing you to eat
more right and you say well why are you
eating more it's like well because
you're you're hungry like the exercise
is inducing you to eat more and that's
going to make it difficult to lose
weight you say in the book in chapter 4
that 95% of weight loss is Diet yeah and
that's the reason why exercise it's very
hard to exercise enough to lose weight
and and and that's not to say that you
shouldn't exercise it's it you really
should exercise everybody should
exercise but if you're trying to lose
weight you still got to focus on the
main topic which is the foods that you
eat which is not just the calories it's
about the types of food that you eat
which is going to affect the hormonal
balance and also how often you eat if
you're eating all the time versus if
you're eating only eating very
infrequently then you're going to have a
different hormonal balance that is going
to affect your weight as well an
American survey of more than 60,000
adults and children revealed that in
1977 most people ate three times a day
by 2003 most people were eating five to
six times a
day
yeah yeah this is the whole idea of sort
of eating all the time and this I find
fascinating because it was this sort of
inadvertent change in our diet that we
never talked about right so in 1977 we
told people eat lots of carbs okay so we
know that that's in print for sure the
American government said eat 55 to 60%
carbs eat less fat what happened is that
you know in 1977 people ate breakfast
lunch and dinner no snacks if you wanted
an after school snack your mom said no
you're going to ruin your dinner if you
wanted a bedtime snack your mom would
say no you should have ate more at
dinner right no
problem but what happened is that as we
started to eat sort of a lot of carbs
what happened is exactly is what we
discussed before you eat two slices of
bread in the morning with Jam you have
no satiety insulin spikes way up glucose
spikes way up but then it crashes
because you get hungry again then you
get hungry at 10:30 so you go around
looking for a low-fat muffin and it was
because you know you know your your your
your sugars are going down your
insulin's going down so now you're
eating midm morning snack then you eat a
big plate of pasta then you get ravenous
at like 3:00 so you go find yourself
some crackers or something like that
right and then so now you're having a
midm morning snack you're having
mid-afternoon snack then you're having a
bedtime and that's the average American
by 2003 is eating six five six times a
day but they're saying hey I'm eating so
low fat this must be the right way to
eat this must be good for me so now this
snacking becomes institutionalized
whereas pre- 1977 snacks are an
Indulgence right it's not something good
for you you it's something bad for you
but hey once in a while you indulge then
it becomes institutionalized as
something that every single one of us
should be doing and we should never be
without food for more than an hour and a
half let's think about this very simply
okay so if you eat your insulin's going
to go up your body is going to store
calories because you're told it to if
you don't eat or if you fast your body
is your your insulin is going to go down
you're going to bring those calories
back out of storage right so you're
going to burn calories you eat you store
calories you don't eat you burn calories
very simple so why would you want to eat
all the time that makes no sense at all
if you want to lose body fat you
actually need to extend the period of
time that you're not eating in other
words extend your fasting period and get
rid of all the snacks in order for you
to have enough time that your insulin is
low when insulin is low it's going to
allow fat burning which is going to
allow you to pull those calories back
out you're cited as being really the
founder of modern intermittent fasting
and I've heard people talk about
intermittent fasting on this show over
and over and over and over again now but
the internet says that it really came
from you I know that inter fasting has
been happening for thousands of years
but the idea of it as a tool for weight
loss they say it came from you because
in 2013 2014 really nobody was talking
about it from a medical standpoint like
what's happening in the body why is it
good why is it bad and really I was for
years sort of this one voice in the
wilderness that was saying like hey this
is a tool for us if you want to lose
weight because it's important then you
can just set aside a period of time that
you don't eat at the time people thought
it was extremely bad for you and I I
looked through all the literature and I
said well why is it bad for you and they
had all these reasons there's all these
myths about intermittent fasting and and
how it's going to cause you to gain
weight and be tired and hungry and all
these sorts things I said well no
there's actually a lot of data here over
the last you know 2,000 years that we've
used intermittent fasting and they're
simply not true and I can go over a few
of those but that's why there was nobody
talking about it at the time and that's
where I started to sort of bring it into
the uh sort of public Consciousness that
this is a tool that's all it is were you
attacked for that at the time oh
absolutely like I got I got attacked
from all sides I you know doctors were
coming after me dietitians were coming
after me everybody thought I was going
to do so much harm and the funny part
was that you know as I think back as I
spoke to a lot of colleagues a lot of
colleagues would say to me you know what
I used to do that when I was in training
we did that all the time we'd go 24
hours without eating because we're in
the o or we're in the ER or we were busy
so we did that constantly and nothing
bad happened and I remember thinking you
know what as a doctor I actually tell
people to fast all the time if you have
to go for surgery you need to fast if
you after surgery you need to fast if
you do fasting blood work you need to
fast so why is it that I'm actually
telling people to fast all the time and
yet for weight loss you shouldn't fast
that doesn't make any sense and
physiologically from a body standpoint
it doesn't make any sense uh one of the
things people talked about was you know
it's going to make you eat more later
it's going to make you more hungry your
basil metabolic rates go down this was
one of the big myths of intermittent
fasting that's going to cause the
so-called starvation mode right and this
is the idea that your basil metabolic
rate will fall so low that when you do
start to eat you're going to gain weight
again so I said well let's think about
this you can do a study where you take
somebody say you for example and you
could fast them for four days and
measure how much how many calories
they're burning their basil metabolic
rate on Day Zero before the fast and
measure them four days into the fast and
see how many calories you're burning so
on Day Zero they say you're you're
burning say 2,000 calories a day on day
four of zero food you don't eat any food
for 4 days they measure how much
calories you're burning your body is
burning 2200 calories your basil
metabolic rate didn't go down it went up
your body's activating itself during
fasting which is fascinating because if
you're trying to lose weight dropping
that matal metabolic rate is death like
if you drop that metabolic rate it's so
hard to lose weight that's what the
calorie restricted diets did that's what
the lowfat diets did the eating all the
time did but when you actually fast your
metabolic rate went up and we see this
in study after study and the reason is
actually basic physiology it's actually
medical physiology like first year
medical school stuff when you don't eat
what happens in your body from a hormone
standpoint is that your insulin is going
to fall you're going to allow your body
to start using the calories that are in
the body at the same time other hormones
go up so the sympathetic tone goes up
which is your fight ORF flight response
your cortisol levels go up because again
it's an activation and your growth
hormone goes up because those hormones
are going to start telling your body to
start pulling calories out so you're
actually activating yourself think about
of the wild if you see a Hungry Wolf is
that wolf just sort of you know all like
lethargic no he's activated he's
actually more dangerous than any other
wolf as opposed to say a lion who just
ate because when you just eat you just
want to lie there you know you you want
to digest your food you have no energy
so people say wow your your your
metabolic rate is going to go down if
you fast no the the truth is actually
the opposite it goes up you've got me
thinking about food as an instruction
I'm giving my body because if I eat this
food it's going to have this impact on
my hormones which is going to have this
impact on my body so if we View food as
an instruction to the body we talked a
little bit about the timings of eating
and a little bit about fasting I want to
get into that a little bit more but
breakfast I read that you didn't think
most people need
breakfast yeah the the whole idea that
you need to eat as soon as you get up is
just false so there's this whole um
thing about breakfast now you will
always break your fast think about the
actual word right break fast it's the
meal that breaks your fast which tells
you that in the English language we
accept that your body should have a
fasting period every day why there's a
period of time that you're supposed to
feed you eat instant goes up you store
calories then there's supposed to be a
period of time that you fast that's
after dinner until the next day's Meal
which is breakfast right so say you stop
eating at 6 p.m. you eat at 8:00 a.m.
that's a 14-hour period where your body
is not eating eating it's fasting and
therefore it's going to use calories
right but the word breakfast tells us
that that's actually a normal pattern
this normal cyclical pattern you feed
then you fast right if you eat all the
time your body's just going to store
energy and never have a period to burn
energy so okay well what's going to
happen you're going to gain weight I
read as well that breakfast eaters
averaged
539 extra calories per day compared to
those that skipped breakfast and that's
a finding that's consistent with other
trials that was on page 132 of the
Obesity code yeah so the more often you
eat in general the more calories you
take in so if you eat three times a day
you or six times a day then you know if
you eat three times a day compared to
two times a day for example you'll in
general eat less because it's harder to
eat that you know big meal so say you
eat once a day versus three times a day
if you eat once a day it's not always
easy to eat three meals worth of
calories all in one sitting because you
get full do you fast oh I do that
regularly yeah and what does your fast
look like cuz I've heard of all these
different types of fasting 36 hours 72
hours oh yeah 14 hours there's no rules
for fasting you could do you know it
could be 16 hours so 14 hours remember
is sort of a baseline 12 to 14 hours
right that just means you're not eating
after dinner that's it um and so if you
want to lose weight that's probably not
strong enough to make you lose weight
because 12 to 14 hours is sort of just
this Baseline that people had in the 70s
um so you can go to 16 hours for example
and you shrink that by either eating
breakfast a little later or eating
dinner a little earlier but you can do
more than that you can do say a 24-hour
fast you could eat two meals a day say
eat between 12 and six that's a six-h
hour eating window or you could eat once
a day which is like a 24-hour fast or
you could even go multiple days uh
without eating because again your body
is smart like our your body knows what
to do if you have all those calories
sitting on your body right 100,000
calories sitting in body fat and you
don't eat for three days well you need
6,000 calories well you have 100,000
200,000 so what's the problem take it
out of your body fat let your body eat
your body fat that's what fasting is
doing for you and it's totally natural
because that's what it's there for that
body fat is not there for books is there
for you as a source as a store of
calories so fasting just lets you use
that there's nothing wrong with it
people talk about Hunger for example but
again hunger is very interesting because
people think it's the amount of time
that you haven't eaten but it's not true
it's actually hormonally mediated so if
you think about Hunger I actually found
this really fascinating so if you look
at studies of when people are the most
hungry and the least hungry on average
people are the most hungry at 8:00 p.m.
and the least hungry at 8:00 a.m. so in
the morning time you actually the least
hungry that you will be all day that's
just an average and at 8 8:00 p.m. in
the evening time you are the most hungry
so 8:00 a.m. is the period of time that
you've gone the longest without food so
why are you the least hungry it's
because it's hormonally mediated when
you wake up at 500 a.m. your body
actually has this surge of hormones
growth hormone cortisol and uh
sympathetic tone which is already
getting you prepared for the day it's
starting to release some of the stored
glucose from your body fat from your
sugar stores at 5:00 a.m. so your body
has already prepared you for the day
ahead without you even doing anything
that's why people in general are not
hungry at 8: a.m. I've got to talk to
you about these um these new injections
people are getting to lose weight yeah
and the role that they must be playing
in our hormone balances what are those
bloody things called the gp1s gp1s
there's another name for it isn't there
yeah uh well it's there's the drug name
which is uh OIC is the is the American
name and these are all in a class called
gp1s and essentially again very
interesting because they
essentially really reduce the appetite
which goes to show you that and people
lose weight like a lot of weight and
they keep it off so using them like a
billionaire friend of mine that's very
big in a certain industry uses a z kind
of Elon Musk came out and said he he
used it yeah as mic as well um I don't
I'm not I I I don't have any problem
with the OIC because again if you think
about it what it's telling you the the
lesson it's teaching you about weight
loss is that it's not about controlling
the calories because the OIC doesn't
burn any calories it's about controll
controlling your hunger it's about that
one level deeper why are you taking so
many calories so if you simply reduce
the hunger you're going to naturally eat
fewer calories which is going to cause
weight loss and that's what this OIC
doeses it really reduces your appetite
to very low levels how it it's it's it's
this this hormone called gp1 uh which is
a natural sort of hormone it's it's
released mostly in the intestines in the
distal intestine and the small intestine
and and in response to certain foods it
it goes up right so when you eat the
body has a homeostatic mechanism so
again remember you know people think
that we're just eating machines we eat
until you know we explode sort of thing
but that's not true when you eat you
actually activate the
gp1 along with other hormones there's
multiple hormonal systems the gp1 is the
one we're interested in you activate gp1
which then sets into motion the the the
instructions for you to stop stop eating
right so the act of eating sort of sets
in motion that whole feedback loop to
stop right so this is homeostasis which
is trying to keep things at a proper
level does that mean if you eat slower
uh you'll be less you'll eat
less there's probably
not yeah probably it's true um you know
although it's probably mostly true that
if you eat really really fast that you
don't have enough time for this sort of
homeostatic mechanisms to kick in so you
don't have enough time to stop eating um
but the GP 1es then go to the brain so
they do certain things they help with
digestion so they increase insulin
response and then they go to the brain
it crosses um the the the bloodb brain
barrier so the glp 1's gets released by
the act of eating goes into the brain
crosses and is active um in the sort of
midbrain area that tells your body to
stop eating what these gp1s do of course
is that it's a uh it it gives you the
hormone that tells you to stop eating
even though you haven't eaten it's sort
of that's that's the way the drug works
so then what people tell you is that you
know they're just not hungry and if
they're not hungry then they don't eat
and when they don't eat of course
insulin Falls and you start to burn
calories and lose weight but it wasn't
about controlling the calories it was
about controlling the hunger that was
the important part of it it's the
hormones right every successful drug to
gain or lose weight right is a hormone
it's a hormone based because that's
instructions to the body food is energy
and food is instructions you change the
instructions and you you change the
hormone this whole history of fiber
thing has been so interesting to me
because in the last six months so many
of the nutritionists I've spoken to have
really impressed upon me that we are
fiber deficient and I'm wondering how
that happened um well I think it was
part of the processing uh thing so
taking out fiber is a great way to make
foods more appealing if you will um so
what happens is that if you take um
flour for example and you have a lot of
fiber in it then the digestion is slowed
so what you get is a slower rise so you
take flour and you put a lot of fiber in
it well instead of uh having this huge
spike in insulin which you're going to
get is a much slower spike in insulin
when you have the huge spike in insulin
it basically overloads your system and
it makes you feel you know gives you
this big hit sort of like if you have
like cocaine for example you know it's
it's turned into a very fine powder then
you snort it so you got this massive
sort of Spike same thing with um you
know carbohydrates if you don't have any
uh fiber you you pull all the fiber out
by processing you get this massive sort
of unnatural Spike and your body says oh
that's great great it tastes great I
really love it and you get people who
are sort of addicted to it because that
big spike is going then going to release
dopamine and dopamine is a pleasure
hormone so you eat you know cookies or
whatever highly processed foods you get
this sort of pleasurable response and
that makes you crave it if you have a
lot of fiber it acts almost sort of like
an antidote to that carbohydrate because
you're slowing down that release what
food are high in fiber well mostly
unprocessed Foods so the the things like
beans and if you're having if you're
eating uh whole grains for example
compared to others then it's going to
have a reduction in the speed of
absorption so it's again not about the
calories necessary or even necessarily
about the carbohydrates because you're
still eating the same amount of
carbohydrate but you're slowing down the
speed at which is absorbed which is
going to change the instructions that
you give your body if you have a massive
spike in glut glucose you get this
massive dopamine surge right and your
body's like yo love it the next time
you're like okay give me that refined
carbohydrate what about protein because
we we tend to think a protein is
something that you know is super great
for weight loss yeah protein is probably
uh sort of inter it's not bad I mean the
main thing is cutting down the
carbohydrates but you know in the OBD
code I really talk about cutting the
processing down because uh proteins
usually don't come as pure protein right
in nature you never find like you know
how you have like whey powder protein or
whatever you get the only way you can do
that is by processing the heck out of
food to get some kind of pure protein it
doesn't exist in nature like it almost
doesn't exist in maybe there's a few
examples but when you eat meat you think
okay there's a lot of protein but that's
actually a lot of fat in there too right
um if you eat anything else that has
protein it's it's rarely uh all protein
you know very lean meats like chicken
breast and stuff are going to be higher
in protein but there's still a lot of
other stuff in there and it's very rare
that somebody will eat just all pure
100% protein it tends to be hard to eat
like the fat brings a lot of flavor and
so on so it's a bit of an unnatural way
to eat sure if you if you're to eat a
lot of protein it does Spike insulin so
it does have some effect to gain weight
but it's actually a very um inefficient
uh macronutrient that is your there's
three macronutrients there's
carbohydrates there's um fat and there's
protein your body stores energy or
calories in two ways there's car glucose
which is carbohydrate and it stores it
as body fat which is fat right it
doesn't protein is not a way for the
body to store energy so when you're
eating a lot of protein it's very
difficult for it to turn it into a
storage mechanism like you know so you
eat glucose and you eat fat you can
store glucose and you can store fat but
you eat protein but you don't really
store it as a source of energy so if all
foods then increase our insulin
levels I guess the best solution is to
fast uh fasting is certainly one way but
just changing the foods to uh other ones
because if you look at the insulin uh
release in processed foods versus
unprocessed Foods there's a huge
difference so if you eat eat sort of uh
highly refined foods like white bread
for example then you're going to have a
very different response in insulin
compared to sort of um a whole a whole
food so unprocessed Foods in general
your body knows how to handle like we've
been eating them for thousands of years
um but certainly anytime you eat your
insulin is going to go up you're giving
your body instructions to store energy
so the solution is to eat less often
what if you do a juice fast juice fast
of course is not a real fast because
you're you're taking a lot of sugars
what you think of juice fasting um I'm
generally I I I think it's less
effective than regular fasting and it
really depends on how much juice you
take if you take a lot of juice you
could easily get you know thousands of
calories plus a lot of sugar if you do
it you know cucumber juice and stuff
that's very low in sugar and kale juice
then it could be very very healthy for
you because there's vitamins and stuff
there so it all depends on how it's done
however the um the fasting is a way for
you to sort of clean out the body so you
can clean out the glucose if you have
excess body fat you're you're going to
use it right so again way to clean it
out and then there's this whole process
called autophagy which is just
fascinating and autophagy is this um so
it's been very topical because in 2016
one of the key researchers was given the
Nobel Prize in medicine so it's it's a
very important process that's been
relatively recently discovered what they
discovered is that when you don't eat
protein particularly but when you fast
your body activates this thing called
autophagy and it breaks down some of the
subcellular organs which sounds really
bad subcellular or organs yeah so uh you
know these are sort of like the organs
within the cell so it's not like the
liver but there's something called
organel within a cell and some of that
is broken down so basically these
proteins and so on within the cell your
body gets rid of that and you think oh
well that sounds really bad but it's not
it turns out that it's very very good
for you because it's an opportunity for
your body to get rid of all this old
protein old junky protein and at the
same time remember that you're fasting
your growth hormone levels are shooting
up through the roof so like a you know
two three day fast your growth hormone
levels might go up five times so you're
getting rid of all the old stuff and
then when you eat again you're actually
got growth hormone to produce new
proteins so Essence you're getting rid
of the old you're bringing in the new
it's basically the process of
Rejuvenation could this be a very
important way to get rid of some of the
chronic illnesses of aging and there's
lots of data uh you know talking about
uh you know Alzheimer's disease there's
talk people talking about cancers
there's people talking about just
general aging you know Dr Chris Palmer
talking about mental disorders we're all
talking about insulin and overeating and
diet as a really important component of
not just diabetes and weight but all of
these diseases mental
illnesses uh you know chronic uh
illnesses like Alzheimer's disease
neurologic illnesses and there's all
this data that suggests that autophagy
and fasting as a way to activate
autophagy could be actually extremely
beneficial for you which is fine when we
used to do it and and you know what's so
interesting is that
people seem to have already known about
it like you see it in almost every major
religion there's periods of fasting
right it's like why did they do that
because it was good for them through
trial and error or whatever they realize
that hey periodically abstaining from
food makes us
stronger if you eat all the time
constantly day in day out week and week
out month in month out that's not that
good for you there are periods that you
should feast and there are periods you
should fast so religion set days or
weeks or months even where you should
fast so it's like whoa why did they do
that and are they just way ahead of us
in terms of understanding the human body
like we get so you know enamored of our
own you know intelligence and Science
and so on that we think they're you know
that they didn't know what they're
talking about maybe maybe they knew more
about what they were talking about and
science is just catching up and saying
oh this process of autophagy that you
activate with fasting this could be
really important for longevity uh for
other things I'm not saying you should
do it like every month or whatever if
you look at the way that people do it
they don't do it like you know they
don't do like five days a month or
something it's they do it once a year or
once every few months how long does a
toughage you take to kick in is it 72
hours did you say um nobody knows but
probably it's and it depends on probably
how much protein you eat protein is the
key um sort of when you eat protein
autophagy just stops so low protein you
can activate it it's probably somewhere
around 20 to 30 hours so you'll see a
lot of religions for example they'll
have like a 24-hour fast right one day
that you're not supposed to eat or
something like that and maybe that's the
way to cleanse your body not just of the
glucose and the fat but also the excess
proteins that are are are old they're
junky I mean you think about renovating
your bathroom or something like that
right the first thing you got to do you
got to throw out the you know 1970s tub
and the avocado green toilet that's the
first thing you got to do you got to get
rid of it you got to break down before
you can rebuild better well autophagy
might be that way to break down some of
the stuff that you actually can't break
down any other way if your body's full
of all this junky
protein you can't get rid of it is there
an evolutionary explanation for the role
of autophagy do you think I think there
is actually I think there's a huge uh
number of reasons why people uh do it
one of it um this whole idea that
fasting actually activates the body for
example um is is very interesting
because I think it's like if you're a
caveman for example or cave woman and
it's winter and there's nothing to eat
if your body starts to shut down then
evolutionarily you're going to die right
because you have less energy you can't
go out and Hunt so our body is just not
that stupid so what it does it says okay
well I'm going to give you more energy
so I'm going to activate the body but
then I'm going to uh change where you're
getting your energy from you're not
going to get the energy from the food
you're going to get it from your body
fat stores which is your stored food
right you stored food for a reason so
that's why I think some of the the
fasting has a lot of evolutionary
benefits because it increases your
energy it it it lowers the glucose so if
if you look at the blood glucose the
blood glucose goes down so in times of
stress and so on your your body actually
naturally fasts if you get sick you get
a flu or something you stop eating first
thing you do right you just want to
drink some water and stuff why because
your body wants to lock down the glucose
because the bacteria love glucose your
body can run on fat but the bacteria
want the glucose so you fast to lock
down the glucose so there's a lot of
evolutionary reasons why the fasting
might be good for you know bacterial
infections taking care of things
increasing your energy increasing your
concentration at a time that you're not
like when you're not eating you're
actually getting more mental capacity
and more energy because you need it in
order to go hunt interesting as you'll
know if you've listened to this podcast
before I'm an investor in a company
called hu I'm on their board and they
sponsor this podcast and I have a very
exciting announcement to make this
product called Daily Greens is one of
the most highly requested products at hu
but it's never been sold in the UK
before until
now it's often difficult to get all of
the greens into our diet that we need to
have a healthy gut microbiome and a
healthy body and with Hues Daily Greens
product with one scoop every morning a
very very delicious scoop you can get 91
vitamins minerals and Whole Food sourced
nutrients into your diet the most
important Point here is I genuinely
believe it tastes delicious it's May my
favorite heu product ever for all the
reasons I've described so if you want
access to this product the link is in
the description below it launches in the
UK in January because of the demand I'm
pretty sure it's going to sell out what
is what is the most interesting thing or
the most you know use the word
interesting a lot or fascinating what is
the most fascinating thing that we
haven't talked
about I think to me the most fascinating
thing is uh other than for intermittent
fasting because a lot of the stuff we
thought about it was wrong uh in fact
the opposite but the the most
interesting thing I think is in the
field of type 2 diabetes because it's
such an important disease um if you look
at the number of people being affected
with type two diabetes it's skyrocketing
so we had since the 1970s an increase in
obesity then we had an increase in type
two diabetes and I think the most
fascinating thing the most promising
thing I've heard in a long time is that
you can actually start to reverse this
disease by changing the diet and and I
think what's interesting is that you
have to understand that type 2 diabetes
is largely a dietary disease and so we
treated it with drugs for a long time
and if you give drugs to a dietary
disease well you're never going to fix
it because you haven't identified the
core problem and fixed it you need to
change the diet to fix that dietary
problem then the disease goes away and
now we have data on intermittent fasting
for example and also uh low carbohydrate
diets Dr David win published his data in
the in the UK on reversing type 2
diabetes with uh reducing carbohydrates
which is showing that you can reduce
about 50% of the people and put them
into a completely drug-free remission
State like basically cure 50% of those
type two diabetics who are at risk of
cancer at risk of heart disease at risk
of Strokes at risk of blindness at risk
of kidney disease nerve damage
infections all these people you can fix
just by changing their diet either
cutting down the carbohydrates or using
intermittent fasting and it's free and
anybody can do it I'm not talking about
a drug that costs thousands of dollars
I'm not talking about a surgery which is
only available to the the the
1% I'm talking about a treatment which
is intermittent fasting which is
available to everybody in the entire
world for free and yet has the power to
completely reverse their disease and
make them so much healthier so the
question is why don't we do
it I couldn't answer that question for
you I try to do my part to tell people
but you know did you know I was going to
ask you that question h no I was gonna
ask you why don't we do
it no what systems incentives money I
think it is I think
it's you know the real reason is I think
that people are slow to catch new ideas
like when people hear about new ideas
and I'm talking about academic doctors
and so on there's an intrinsic
resistance to change so I started
talking about intermittent fasting say
2016 when the Obesity code was published
I talked about it about reversing type 2
diabetes around the same time um and
uh it's just they're just very slow to
say hey this makes a lot of sense
because for them they've invested so
much in this calories in calories out
model they've built their entire careers
on saying that it's it's your fault that
you're fat right it's it's the foods
that you ate it's the calories that you
ate instead of trying to get to a deeper
understanding so people are very
reluctant to change in fact I mean it's
been 10 years and you see the public the
interest in intermittent fasting has
skyrocketed and yet most doctors still
won't prescribe it they won't talk about
it they know nothing about it there's
how much teaching do doctors get about
intermittent fasting and why it might be
helpful probably
zero like why we have this amazing tool
and people you know doctors call it a
fad right it's a fad diet well it's been
around for 2,000 plus years that's a
long long long fad right it's it's
proven effective if you don't eat you're
going to lose weight
what's simpler than that if you don't
eat you're going to use up your blood
glucose your diabetes will get better
what's wrong with that it's not hard to
understand the diabetes code I've got
the diabetes Journal here in front of me
and put simply it talks about step one
being to put less sugar in and step two
being burn the sugar off yeah and and
step one which relates to putting more
sugar in is all about um low
carbohydrate diets right cutting down
the carbohydrates uh yeah that's that's
one effective way of cutting down the
type 2 diabetes in fact the American
Diabetes Association and their sort of
um nutritional journals they talk about
it uh having the most scientific
evidence of any diet there's no diet
with more evidence for reversing type 2
diabetes than cutting down the
carbohydrates and then step two about
burning the sugar off and that's where
fasting comes into the picture yeah I
mean if you think about it there's
there's it's it's not that hard to
understand everybody can understand it
you don't eat you're going to lose
weight right I mean it's it's such a
simple powerful tool but it it threatens
the whole apple cart all these doctors
all these professors which have built
their entire reputations all these uh
systems that are in place person TR yeah
personal trainers work on a different
level because they talk about more
exercise umies calories out I think when
we talk about calories on this show some
times I think the people that get quite
offended tend to be um personal trainers
because I think they would say they've
got case studies of telling one of their
clients to
monitor their calories and they saw a
reduction in weight so they for them
that means it works there's calories in
calories out model um it again it it is
that but it's a simplistic understanding
that's that's that's my whole point it's
sort of like if AR to say to you why did
the Titanic crash right and most people
would say hidden Iceberg well that's
very simplistic that's not the right
answer the right answer is it was going
too fast right if you think the right
answer to why did the tanic crashes
because it HD an iceberg you'd say the
solution is to hit less icebergs which
is the same as eat less calories or
drink less alcohol that's a very
superficial understanding you have to
get to the deeper level which is say why
did the Titanic hit that Iceberg it was
going too fast and there was all these
icebergs and it was going too fast for
where it was so then you say it needs to
slow down now you've identified that
deeper understanding same as with
calories you can say eat less calories
and for some people work but for some
people it's like why are you eating so
many calories is it because you're
hungry why are you hungry is it because
all those calories that you're eating
are going immediately into storage
you're eating white bread and jam and
sugar and all of going directly into
storage which is leaving you hungry
which is making you eat too many
calories so in the end yes you are
eating more calories but that's the sort
of first order thinking and not the
second order thinking that we need to be
doing and that's what the OIC and so on
starts to address is the hunger issue
and this is really what all your work
addresses and it's really the first time
I've heard someone talk to me about
obesity and weight gain through the lens
of hormones never really I've never
heard that before and really reading
through your work was really
Illuminating because it allowed me to
change my frame and it's as you say when
we're just focusing on the surface it's
very easy to fail because we need to
understand the first principles of
what's going on underneath the surface
for that long-term success to stand a
chance of occurring and I think everyone
listening to this who's struggled with
weight or obesity or whatever else
um can relate to this idea that
something's not working in you know if
there was any diet that work there
wouldn't be a thousand of them yeah and
I think the other thing is to understand
that it's not the personal failing that
we make it out to be which is I think
extremely unfair because obviously
there's something within the system
within the food environment within the
system of how we're framing it which is
making a lot of people overweight but
it's not because they don't have
willpower or because they're weak or
these other number of reasons that we
stigmatize obesity because we look at it
from that calories in calories out
framework right we say you're eating too
many calories you must be weak as
opposed to you're eating too many
calories what why is it that you're
eating too many calories why are you
hungry all the time in a word then if
you had to describe what you think about
this idea of calories in calories out
what is that word I would say that it's
shallow it's
correct if you don't think about it too
hard anybody who focuses in on
thermodynamics and calories hasn't
really thought about the problem enough
that's what I think so in the end it is
correct just like alcohol in alcohol out
you know hitting the iceberg yes it did
hit an iceberg that's why it but it was
going too fast right or alcohol in yes
if you drink less alcohol you'll cure
your alcoholism but you won't cure the
PTSD that caused you you to drink
correct but not helpful exactly that's
exactly right it's it's it's it is
correct but it's sort of not getting to
that root deeper cause that we need to
in order to help people and that's
causing us to blame them so what we're
doing which I think is very unfair is
blaming the victim like do you think
this person who's trying to lose 50 lbs
needs you to tell them that need need to
lose 50 lbs absolutely not that's only
going to be the 10,000th time they've
heard it it's interesting because one of
our guests talked about the role of
compassion and kindness in weight loss
and now through the lens of
understanding cortisol now I can
understand how kindness and gratitude
and being happy yeah you know for lack
of a better word can help us lose weight
and when we're not happy when we're
resentful when we're low in gratitude um
when we're bitter yeah we're more likely
to gain weight and and and other things
help too because if you think about
things like a sense of community it's
very important lowest cortisol levels
lowest cortisol is a way for you to
relieve stress right talking to other
people we did that we did of course
limit that during covid and of course we
saw a lot of problems but one of them
was lonel and all these sort of things
but again I always think about um you
know
people you know the way they are so if
you look at a lot of religions for
example it's like oh they were so far
ahead of us what did they do they
brought people together every week oh
you're building a sense of community
fasting oh they all got together and
fasted they all shared they're lowering
their cortisol they're lowering their
insulin levels they're staying healthy
and and we in our big mcmansions right
we we we eat the the ice cream for
dinner and we live alone in this giant
house and we wonder why we're not as as
as happy as you know our grandparents or
our parents before them because they
understood the power of some of these
things that we're trying to get back to
like the the weirdest thing is that I'm
not trying to tell people something
that's weird and unusual and you never
thought about this before I'm trying to
tell them about something that everybody
in human history history has been
exposed to which is intermittent fasting
that's been a part of our human history
whether it's through religion or whether
it's through inadvertent whatever or
whether it's through his cleansing and
purifications and all this sort of stuff
people have exposed it even in the
English language breakfast break your
fast you need to feed then you need to
fast then you need to break your fast so
I'm not telling people anything
different Jason thank you so much we um
feel like we could talk for hours
because I'm so there's so
many sort of I was thinking about it
like spiderwebs but there's so many
little branches we could go off on as it
relates to hormones and the impact of
hormones on the human body you have this
other book as well called the PCOS plan
um preventing and reversing polycystic
ovary syndrome which is a you know a
whole another conversation for another
time but these books are so wonderful
because they provide a new lens on an
old conversation and a conversation
that's lacked the depth that's required
to make any significant progress on
these subjects as we've seen obesity
levels and other issues with weight have
gone in the wrong direction for the last
couple of decades and I think it's a
more systemic understanding of these
issues that will give us any chance of
reversing it and that's exactly what
your work does um everyone knows where
to find you Dr Jason Fang will link all
of your work in the description below we
have a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last last guest leaves a
question for the next guest without
knowing who they're leaving it for and
the question that's been left for you
is what is your greatest gift to the
world I think if if if you know I
suppose it's sounds very arrogant um but
I really hope that my my work helps
people sort
of reverse the type two diabetes because
that is really sort of one of the most
close things that I deal with because I
deal with it professionally sort of
every day um and helps break the stigma
of not just the stigma but the
understanding like like you know
stimulates more thinking about weight
loss how to lose weight more than
calories in calories out I mean it's so
sort of Pie in the Sky because you know
it's there's a whole you know worldwide
sort of instit tionalized fossilized
almost you know thinking around calories
it's all about calories sort of thing so
to for me to upset it seems
ridiculous but I hope that I can at
least start that conversation to say hey
let's think about these things let's
think about the hormones let's think
about reversing type two diabetes let's
think about all getting together and
helping each other to become so much
healthier not through drugs and not
through more surgery and not with you
know weird and new things that you've
never heard of but with the tried and
the true sort of oldest thinking that
has been there right it's it's to me
it's I I sometimes think about this
crazy I like why do I think I can even
do that right it's just ridiculous it's
so much huis but you know I I can only
try right because I I see in my own
practi practice how much good it's done
for some people so it drives me to say I
need to bring it to more people I need
to to to explain it to them if they want
to be helped they will be helped but if
they don't want to understand it's okay
I'm not trying to force myself to do
anything but you know that's what I hope
my greatest gift will be um but at the
same time I sort of think that's just
you know you're crazy if you can think
you can do that but well it's The Crazy
Ones that change the world Dr Jason um
it's the crazy ones that changed the
world and even with you know your
conversation around intermittent fasting
has changed many many lives that you'll
never get to meet I imagine many many
millions many many millions because it's
even brought the conversation to this
show before you entered the room many
many months and months and months and
almost a year ago people started talking
on the show about intermittent fasting
and that's in many respects due to the
work that you've done to further that
conversation and now your work continues
to highlight the fact that type 2
diabetes is a reversible disease in many
cases and I think again that's going to
save you know tens of millions if not
hundreds of millions of lives over the
coming coming decades and years so thank
you for what you do Dr Jason um it's an
huge honor to get to sit with you today
and I feel wiser and more enlightened
and like someone has turned the lights
on in a certain part of my knowledge
because of this conversation so I thank
you for that tremendously thank you so
much it's been
[Music]
great one we are working with an
exciting new sponsor on this podcast
Shopify I'm sure you guys have heard of
Shopify if you haven't been living under
a rock but for those that don't know
Shopify is a Commerce platform
revolutionizing millions of businesses
worldwide it is pretty incredible they
provide everything you need to start
your business and it's super simple to
get started and to get your business out
there here at the Dio we've used Shopify
for a variety of our different product
drops the latest being the conversation
cards and without the help of Shopify
that wouldn't have been possible it's
mine and my team's goto website for all
things Commerce related so I'm giving
you guys the chance to trial Shopify for
$1 that's right $1 sign up for a $1
trial for a month by searching
shopify.com
Bartlet all lowercase keep it to
yourself and let me know how you get
on do you need a podcast to listen to
next we've discovered that people who
liked this episode also tend to
absolutely love another recent episode
we've done so I've linked that episode
in the description below I know you'll
enjoy
[Music]
it